There's one more thing about hooks that I want to cover and that is writing reusable custom hooks yourself.
Now I know it seems kind of complicated but it's actually really easy.
But we have to first explore why we would want to do such a thing so inside of our test application
what we have are these two components.
One is a user component and one is a post component what you pass.
Each of these components is an I.D. which we will then use to fetch against our Jason Place holder API
that we've been using to see whether or not the user or the post exists.
If the user exists will display the name and the user name and if the post exists we'll show the title
and the body.
Now if they don't exist what we'll do is we'll just show this text user not found or post nothing.
And the code is pretty simple in terms of how we're rendering it.
We just need to actually figure out how to get our user using the user I.D. we pass into our user component
and our post is going to be similar.
Lee the same thing.
Now one of the hunches that we get when we write this code is that we'll probably end up writing very
similar code.
But let's just write it for practices sake so that we can flush it out and see what we got to do before
we write our custom hook let's just write the independent solutions to create what we need inside of
our respective components.
Now we probably will need are used state hook and our use effect hook as we're most commonly used to
using them by now and what we're going to do is we are going to get a post and also a set post from
this use state Hook where our default object will be null because we're going to get back an object.
Now what we want to do in our use effect hook is we will pass in this function and then we're going
to do our async pattern as we remember where we write the actual async function inside of our function.
So we'll set we'll call it fetch post equals a sync function and what it does is inside we are going
to get a concept of our response back from our FETCH AND THEN WE'RE GONNA PASS in R U or L.
So let's go to our Jason Place holder you are all here.
Let's just go to our posts so we know what we need is we need to go to this euro and we are gonna say
we want the post where the I.D. goes to the actual I.D. that we're gonna pass to it.
So let's say post I.D. right here right.
Using our string interpolation.
So there's nothing too new here.
We just have to make sure to await for this as well as our cost much post and then we're gonna say cost
posts will be equal to our away call of our Red Dog Jason.
And as we remember when we fetch it from a you are all like this with our Jason Place holder we'll get
back in array right.
Where this I.D. matches the post I.D. but because we now work our I.D. are gonna be unique.
Well of course always get the first one.
So it'll be easier for us then to just say something like sup post equal to posts at zero
if this is the case right.
If we have something inside of our array then this will be the object that gets sent to our post.
If there's nothing then we'll just get undefined which is still fine for us.
And then we've got to make sure to call our fetch post
and then once we say we will now see at least that we are fetching our post right.
Because the I.D. we actually have inside of our app just being passed in right here.
So we're bringing in our post and we're passing a post idea 15 the same we're gonna apply for our user
I.D. So let's write the same code.
We know we are going to use state and use affect and we know that we're going to get a user and that
user which equals our used state again with a default value of not and then we're going to call our
use affect
and do something very similar.
Fudge user equals an async function where we'll get our response from our fetch.
Except this time instead of posts we're gonna fetch users and we're gonna pass an I.D. equal to our
user.
Similarly we're going to get users which equals are going to await this call.
We've got to wait for our response Dot.
Jason and then we're call set user on our users.
0 and then we call fetch user
and now we'll see that we should be getting our user string interpolation ups.
So I was using the wrong type of string area.
So here we see we're able to get our code we're able to get the object of the user for user 5 or 15
if they exist but if we look at this code between this code and our postcode we'll actually see that
it's pretty much the same code that we're writing.
It's just that what is setting posts and one is setting users.
So what we can do here is we can move this into a reusable affect that we can bring into our components
so let's do it like this in order for us to write this we have to make a new folder we're gonna call
it an inside of our effects folder we're gonna make a new effect called use fetch.
So the thing about R affects if their custom is that they always must use the syntax of use and then
the functionality.
So for us we're trying to use our fetch.
So we're going to call it use fetch and this is just the naming practice that the react team wants us
to follow.
So we'll just do use fetch dot effect dog J us so that we know it's in effect and inside what we're
going to do is we're pretty much going to import in what we had before except we're gonna modify this
code so that it's reusable what we'll say is we will bring in our use state and our use effect from
react and then we're gonna make a function that we're gonna call use fetch
now because we're not passing in a specific I.D. We're gonna get the I.D. from our component we instead
are gonna pass a whole U or L that we're gonna call our affection and then inside we're gonna duplicate
this code that we have here except we're gonna make it more generic so instead of user we're probably
going to use a generic data and we're gonna set set data and then you stay is the same because we don't
want to end up with one object now instead of fetch user we're gonna call it fetch data and then instead
of manually passing in and string and terminating this you are all we're gonna get the URL from our
function anyways so that's the great thing about these custom effects that we write we can send in any
number of parameters because all we're writing is a function we're just leveraging a function that has
leverage to these hooks because as we remember our functional components are also functions and hooks
function inside of functions.
So that's why we're able to just write functions how powerful we are but then leverage the existing
code that we need in fact don't even have to use this function syntax we can completely write our code
like we normally would with our aero functions.
It's entirely up to you.
It's very flexible.
So we'll say use fetch we'll pass in the URL we'll get this URL we'll get the response and then we know
that what we'll have is a data array.
Right.
Because of what we're fetching from.
So if we knew that the year if we wanted to make a more generic one for fetching any URL right we can
do that too.
But in our case we know we'll always end up getting an array because of the URLs that we're using in
our application and now we have pretty much completed this effect inside.
And we just got to make sure that from this use fetch what we're returning is the data that we finished
fetching
and now if we save and export this out
we can bring this effect now into our components.
We're just gonna import in our use effect from facts use effect of
and now what we do in order to use it is we set cost user equal to our use effect and now this pretty
much is how we're going to use it how it was used fetch.
Sorry I name that wrong.
There we go so let's just pass this here okay.
A little mistake in naming conventions we can remove these now because we're no longer using them we're
using our custom effect and we'll see their user still works we refresh.
We see that we got a flash of our message if there was no user I will pull in our user once it comes
in and all our code still works the same.
So I use fudge hook is now reusable here and you can imagine similarly it will be the same thing inside
of our post component.
So let's just import that again.
Are you such from facts you such a fact or just copy.
Are you are l 0 seconds post equals use fetch on r u r l and now we see both our code works we don't
need this import any more either and we've now got this reusable fetch inside of our components so simply
it's just like writing utility functions right we're just extrapolating out these effects that we see
our reusable and then compose them into these reusable effects that we can bring into our components
so very handy.
This is the great thing about writing our own hooks now of course this can be done in any way we want
right we can use these effects hooks and these use state hooks right as well as the other hooks that
are a little bit more obscure in the react hook world to build our own custom hooks and we're able to
now extrapolate out reusable code in our components and share them across our components which is the
big advantage of writing hooks.
Once you start writing hooks in a certain way for your applications you start thinking about what parts
of my components can share the same functionality and then you end up just making custom hooks that
will share that for you so hopefully this is a good introduction to what the potential for hooks can
be.
And again at the point of this time hooks are still a pretty new technology.
So there's a lot that you can do with it right.
It's really just a tool.
And different companies and different projects you join may end up using these tools in completely different
ways.
As of yet there's not that many best practices other than what the react hooks documentation suggests
which I definitely suggest you take a look at as well especially if you want to see some of the other
hooks that are available to us now.
There will definitely be projects where you join where they may not want to use hooks at all because
the existing ecosystem works for them right.
And if you've been on a project for three years that's been built using the react redux saga or whatever
library combination of the react project it might not make sense to suddenly migrate your entire application
over to using hooks if you've been using class components perfectly fine.
Again it all comes down to the project that you join and the team that you join as well as the business
goals of the companies that you end up working with but it's good to know what tools you have available
in case the team you join does eventually one day want to migrate slowly over to hooks or they want
to write the code that they write from now on in hooks so having knowledge of it is good OK.
Now let's move forward with our course.